Add Best Practice: Modularize your build (#33492)
gradle/gradle: platforms/documentation/docs/src/docs/userguide/best-practices/best_practices_general.adoc

<<tags_reference.adoc#tag:upgrades,`#upgrades`>>

[[modularize_builds]]
== Modularize Your Builds
:keywords: structuring-builds

Modularize your builds by splitting your code into multiple projects.

=== Explanation

Splitting your build's source into multiple Gradle projects (modules) is essential for leveraging Gradle's automatic work avoidance and parallelization features.
When a source file changes, Gradle only recompiles the affected projects.
If all your sources reside in a single project, Gradle can't avoid recompilation and won't be able to run tasks in parallel.

> Splitting your source into multiple projects can provide additional performance benefits by minimizing each subproject's compilation classpath and ensuring code generating tools such as annotation and symbol processors run only on the relevant files.

Reviewer: ❔ Should we mention somewhere that Gradle does well with a bigger amount of source files per module due to incremental compilation?

Author: I also think it's more important to strongly emphasize that you should aim to benefit from work avoidance here.  This does mention incremental compilation later when explaining the example.

Do this _soon_.
Don't wait until you hit some arbitrary number of source files or classes to do this, instead structure your build into multiple projects from the start using whatever natural boundaries exist in your codebase.

Exactly how to best split your source varies with every build, as it depends on the particulars of that build.
Here are some common patterns we found that can work well and make cohesive projects:

- API vs. Implementation
- Front-end vs. Back-end
- Core business logic vs. UI
- Vertical slices (e.g., feature modules each containing UI + business logic)
- Inputs to source generation vs. their consumers
- Or simply closely related classes.

Ultimately, the specific scheme matters less than ensuring that your build is split logically and consistently.

Expanding a build to hundreds of projects is common, and Gradle is designed to scale to this size and beyond.
In the extreme, tiny projects containing only a class or two are probably counterproductive.

> However, you should typically err on the side of adding more projects rather than fewer.

Reviewer: ❌ I suggest to remove this sentence. I think erring on the side of adding more projects is counterproductive.

Author: Can you explain further?

I think it's usually understood that the idiom "err on the side of X" doesn't mean just do X without considering alternatives or impact.  I meant this to say that if you're wondering if you have enough files to be worth splitting a project, you should go ahead an split.  I don't think this is a bad recommendation.

=== Tags

<<tags_reference.adoc#tag:upgrades,`#upgrades`>>

[[modularize_builds]]
== Modularize Your Builds
:keywords: structuring-builds

Modularize your builds by creating subprojects.

=== Explanation

Splitting your build's source into multiple modules (Gradle projects) is key to taking advantage of Gradle's automatic work avoidance and parallelization features.
After making a change to a source file, Gradle only needs to recompile affected projects.
If all your source lives in a single project, Gradle can't skip any recompilations and won't be able to run tasks in parallel.

> You'll likely find other performance benefits of splitting source between projects due to minimizing the compilation classpath of each subproject to only the required dependencies, only running annotation processors on the source files that need them, and so on.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Splitting your build into multiple projects can provide additional performance benefits by minimizing each subproject's compilation classpath and ensuring annotation processors run only on the relevant source files.
```

It makes sense to split your build's source into multiple projects _early_.
Don't wait until you hit some arbitrary number of source files or classes to do this, instead structure your build into multiple projects from the start using whatever natural boundaries exist in your codebase.

> This helps you plan for future growth as your build matures, and improves comprehensibility as each project can be described independently.

Reviewer 2: I would remove this sentence. I feel like the previous statement is stronger without this additional sentence:
```suggestion
```

Exactly how to split your source in a build varies.

> Common boundaries that make cohesive projects can include horizontal layers (e.g. API vs. implementation, front vs. back end, core business logic vs. UI), vertical slices (e.g. feature modules each containing UI + business logic), inputs to source generation vs. their consumers, or just closely related classes.

Reviewer 2: It would be nice to make this a bullet point since this is already a lot of text:
```suggestion
Common boundaries that make cohesive projects can include horizontal layers such as:

- API vs. Implementation
- Front-end vs. Back-end
- Core business logic vs. UI
- Vertical slices (e.g., feature modules each containing UI + business logic)
- Inputs to source generation vs. their consumers
- Or simply closely related classes.
```

> In general, it matters less _how_ you split your source than that you _do_ split it according to some reasonable scheme.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ultimately, the specific scheme matters less than ensuring that your build is split logically and consistently.
```

Expanding a build to hundreds of projects is common, and Gradle is designed to scale to this size and beyond.

> In the extreme, tiny projects containing only a class or two are probably counterproductive.

Reviewer 2: I would get rid of this sentence and the next. I don't think it adds much.

Author: I note from discussion that we thought this was an important caveat, so I'd prefer to leave it.

=== Tags

<<tags_reference.adoc#tag:upgrades,`#upgrades`>>

[[modularize_builds]]
== Modularize Your Builds
:keywords: structuring-builds

> Modularize your builds by creating subprojects.

Reviewer 3: Could we use "by splitting your code into subprojects"?

Creating subprojects is just the first step of splitting your build and just creating empty ones will not give you any benefits.

=== Explanation

> Splitting your build's source into multiple modules (Gradle projects) is essential for leveraging Gradle's automatic work avoidance and parallelization features.

Reviewer 3: I feel like we should stick to either project or module through this suggestion. We seem to use both here.

When a source file changes, Gradle only recompiles the affected projects.
If all your sources reside in a single project, Gradle can't avoid recompilation and won't be able to run tasks in parallel.

> Splitting your build into multiple projects can provide additional performance benefits by minimizing each subproject's compilation classpath and ensuring annotation processors run only on the relevant source files.

Reviewer 3: "and ensuring annotation processors"

I would expand it to be "and ensuring code generating tools such as annotation and symbol processors" to include KSP, antlr and other tools out there.

> It makes sense to split your build's source into multiple projects _early_.

Reviewer 3: "It makes sense" feels like an odd phrasing here.

Should we say, "Split your build's ..." or "Consider splitting your build's source ..."?

Author: Rephrasing to make this stronger and concise.

Don't wait until you hit some arbitrary number of source files or classes to do this, instead structure your build into multiple projects from the start using whatever natural boundaries exist in your codebase.

> Exactly how to split your source in a build varies.

Reviewer 3: "There is no single way on how to split your source as it is very project dependent. Here are some common patterns we found that can work well:"

=== Tags

<<tags_reference.adoc#tag:upgrades,`#upgrades`>>

[[modularize_builds]]
== Modularize Your Builds
:keywords: structuring-builds

> Modularize your builds by splitting your code into subprojects.

Reviewer 3: In Gradle context `subprojects` imply children of a given project (https://docs.gradle.org/nightly/javadoc/org/gradle/api/Project.html#getSubprojects())

Given that, should we just say "multiple projects"?

Because I don't think the goal of this practice to put split up projects under a specific project hierarchy.
